---
layout: post
title:  An ontology for workflows to enable interoperability
date:   2017-01-05 10:54
category: proposal
---

This work has shown that there is significant ambiguity in the definition of
``scientific workflows'' and that a pressing need exists to leverage the
different types of systems that exist to address scientific challenges. While
the idea of creating a single, unifying workflow management system that
addresses all of the needs of the community is tempting, it is likely
impossible. On the other hand, facilitating interoperability between these
systems has been shown to work with Eclipse ICE and Triquetrum as well as other
tools, such as Kepler and Pegasus, \[Mandal, 2007].

Therefore this work proposes the following tasks to

* develop a comprehensive ontology of workflows and workflow management
systems to show the complex relationships and similarities between the tools,
thereby revealing the means to enable interoperability.
* demonstrate the utility of this ontology by creating an interoperability
layer between several workflow management systems using the common building
blocks approach of Jha et al., \[Jha, 2016], language translation tools such as
Extensible Stylesheet Language Transformations (XSLT), and other means as
required.
* deploy this layer as a common building block itself through a scalable web
service.
* demonstrate the utility of the interoperability layer by executing
complex, multi-system workflows across hardware types for problems relevant to
energy science, including the ICEMAN and VIBE projects. 

It is interesting to ask why an ontology is necessary in lieu of a taxonomy, a
controlled vocabulary, or another mechanism of modeling the workflow science
space. The primary benefit of an ontology over these other mechanisms is that
onotologies are neither controlled (vocabularies) nor hierarchical
(taxonomies).

Hierarchy and control constrain and bias models in unnecessary ways, especially
when the relationships between most types of information are not directed,
\[Weinberger, 2008]. Ontologies show relationships between elements without
imposing order and are much easier to extend because new elements with new
characteristics do not require modifying the architecture and layout of the
taxonomy. For example, a taxonomy would require that all workflow systems
derive, ultimately, from one or more parent workflow system types, and that the
properties of each system be drawn from one or more controlled vocabularies
that are supported by the taxonomy. This simply may not be the case and,
instead, an ontology would not impose such an organization, but produce a list
of the properties of each system and an undirected graph of the relationships
between ontological elements.

One important thing to keep in mind about ontologies is that it is important to
describe how they map to or extend existing ontologies. There are many ways to
produce these mappings by leveraging the extensive body of literature available
from the library and informational sciences community, \[Allemang, 2008].

The necessity of producing the interoperability layer as a scalable web service
cannot be overstated. All of the workflow management systems cited in this
work publish scalable web services and interact with other webservices in one
or more ways. Their are several additional advantages presented by the
accepting this technology for this work, but perhaps the largest is that it
will make it possible for the interoperability layer itself to be integrated as
yet another workflow element in workflow management systems.

Producing the ontology and interoperability layer for this work will require a
survey of workflows and workflow management systems in the community. For the
latter and for the energy science demonstrations, virtual ``containers'' such
as Docker will be used to work with the systems in practice on the Compute And
Data Environment for Science at Oak Ridge National Laboratory. In addition to
making it possible to study these systems, using containers will also preserve
this work for others who may seek to reproduce it in the future.

# References

_Mandal, Nandita et al. “Integrating Existing Scientific Workflow Systems: The Kepler/Pegasus Example.” Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Workflows in Support of Large-Scale Science. New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2007. 21–28. ACM Digital Library. Web. 20 Dec. 2016. WORKS ’07._

_Jha, Shantenu, and Matteo Turilli. “A Building Blocks Approach towards Domain Specific Workflow Systems?” arXiv:1609.03484 [cs] (2016): n. pag. arXiv.org. Web. 14 Dec. 2016._

_Weinberger, David. Everything Is Miscellaneous: The Power of the New Digital Disorder. New York, NY, USA: Henry Holt and Co., Inc., 2008. Print._

_Allemang, Dean, and James A. Hendler. Semantic Web for the Working Ontologist: Modeling in RDF, RDFS and OWL. Amsterdam: Morgan Kaufmann/Elsevier, 2008. Print._
